Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He could no longer 
see his friends. The Riders behind were falling back: even their great 
steeds were no match in speed for the white elf-horse of Glorfindel. He 
looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching the 
Ford before he was cut off by the others that had lain in ambush. He could 
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black 
cloaks, and they were robed in white and grey. Swords were naked in their 
pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered, and they 
called to him with fell voices. 

Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No 
cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the horse's mane. The wind 
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A 
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a 
flash of white fire, the elf-horse speeding as if on wings, passed right 
before the face of the foremost Rider. 

Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the 
quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony 
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford. 

But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the bank the horse 
halted and turned about neighing fiercely. There were Nine Riders at the 
water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before the threat of their 
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would prevent them from crossing as 
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over 
the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge of Rivendell, if once the 
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt. 
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse. 

Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It checked at 
the water and reared up. With a great effort Frodo sat upright and 
brandished his sword. 

'Go back!' he cried. 'Go back to the Land of Mordor, and follow me no 
more! ' His voice sounded thin and shrill in his own ears. The Riders 
halted, but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him 
with a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To 




Mordor we will take you!' 

’Go back!' he whispered. 

The Ring! The Ring!' they cried with deadly voices; and immediately 
their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two 
others. 

'By Elbereth and L®thien the Fair,' said Frodo with a last effort, 
lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!' 

Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in 
his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his 
tongue cleave to his mouth, and his heart labouring. His sword broke and 
fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost 
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore. 

At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing: a noise of loud 
waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the river below him rise, and 
down along its course there came a plumed cavalry of waves. White flames 
seemed to Frodo to flicker on their crests and he half fancied that he saw 
amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three 
Riders that were still in the midst of the Ford were overwhelmed: they 
disappeared, buried suddenly under angry foam. Those that were behind drew 
back in dismay. 

With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed to him 
that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure 
of white light; and behind it ran small shadowy forms waving flames, that 
flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world. 

The black horses were filled with madness, and leaping forward in 
terror they bore their riders into the rushing flood. Their piercing cries 
were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo 
felt himself falling, and the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and 
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more. 

Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that he 
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge 
of memory. Or perhaps he had been ill? But the ceiling looked strange; it 
was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay a little while longer 
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the sound of a 
waterfall. 

'Where am I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the ceiling. 'In 
the House of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in the morning.' said a voice. 

'It is the morning of October the twenty -fourth, if you want to know.' 

'Gandalf!' cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting 
in a chair by the open window. 

'Yes,' he said, 'I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after 
all the absurd things you have done since you left home.' Frodo lay down 
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did 
not think he would get the better of an argument. He was fully awake now, 
and the memory of his journey was returning: the disastrous 'short cut' 
through the Old Forest the 'accident' at The Prancing Pony ; and his madness 
in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking 
of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his 
arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft 
puffs of Gandalf s pipe, as he blew white smoke -rings out of the window. 

'Where's Sam?' Frodo asked at length. 'And are the others all right?' 

'Yes, they are all safe and sound,' answered Gandalf. 'Sam was here 
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.' 

'What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. 'It all seemed so dim somehow; 
and it still does.’ 

'Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,' answered Gandalf. 'The 
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you would have 
been 

beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As you 
showed in the Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps the most dangerous 




moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.' 

'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. 'I have not spoken 
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards 
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?' 

'You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,' said Gandalf gently, 'and 
it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory. Do not worry! 
Though I said "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and 
of the others. It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such 
dangers, still bearing the Ring.' 

'We should never have done it without Strider,' said Frodo. 'But we 
needed you. I did not know what to do without you.' 

'I was delayed,' said Gandalf, 'and that nearly proved our ruin. And 
yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.' 

'I wish you would tell me what happened!' 

'All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything 
today, by Elrond's orders.' 

'But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are quite as 
tiring,’ said Frodo. ’I am wide awake now, and I remember so many things 
that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You ought to tell me that at 
least.' 

'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have 
a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I will only say 
that I was held captive.' 

'You?' cried Frodo. 

'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,' said the wizard solemnly. 'There are many 
powers in the world, for good or for evil. Some are greater than I am. 
Against some I have not yet been measured. But my time is coming. The 
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!' 

'Then you knew of the Riders already -before I met them?’ 

'Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the Black 
Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings. But 
I did not know that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at 
once. I heard news of them only after I left you in June; but that story 
must wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.' 

'Yes,' said Frodo, 'it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of 
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we 
met Glorfindel.' 




Gandalf smiled. V I have heard all about Sam,' he said. 'He has no more 
doubts now.' 

'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well, 
fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he is strange, 
and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I didn't know that 
any of the Big People were like that. I thought, well, that they were just 
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked 
like Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except 
perhaps the Breelanders.' 

'You don't know much even about them, if you think old Barliman is 
stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his own ground. He thinks less 
than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall in time (as 
they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son 
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It 
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.' 

'Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old 
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder. 'I thought they had all vanished long ago. I 
thought he was only a Ranger.' 

'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. 'My dear Frodo, that is just what the 
Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people, the Men of 
the West. They have helped me before; and I shall need their help in the 
days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at 
rest.' 

'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But so far my only thought has been to 
get here; and I hope I shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant 
just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has 
been as much as I want.' 

He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have 
been reckoning,' he said, 'and I can't bring the total up to October the 
twenty-fourth. It ought to be the twenty-first. We must have reached the 
Ford by the twentieth.' 

'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf. 
'How do the side and shoulder feel now?’ 

’I don't know.' Frodo answered. 'They don't feel at all: which is an 
improvement, but'— he made an effort— 'I can move my arm again a little. 
Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left 
hand with his right. 




'Good!' said Gandalf. "It is mending fast. You will soon be sound 
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were 
brought in.' 

'Days?' said Frodo. 

'Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves brought you 
from this where you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has 
hardly left your side, day or night, except to run messages. Elrond is a 
master of healing, but the weapons of our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the 
truth, I had very little hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment 
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last 
night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply buried, and it was 
working inwards.' 

Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that 
had vanished in Strider's hands. 'Don't be alarmed!' said Gandalf. 'It is 
gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very 
reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would 
quickly have been overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen 
days.’ 

'What would they have done to me?’ asked Frodo. 'What were the Riders 
trying to do?’ 

'They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul-knife which remains in 
the wound. If they had succeeded, you would have become like they are, only 
weaker and under their command. You would have became a wraith under 
the 

dominion of the Dark Lord; and he would have tormented you for trying to 
keep his Ring, if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it 
and seeing it on his hand.' 

'Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!' said Frodo 
faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I should 
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!' 

'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf, 'not to mention 
courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced; 
and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow 
shave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, for 
then you were half in the wraith- world yourself, and they might have seized 
you. You could see them, and they could see you.’ 

'I know,' said Frodo. 'They were terrible to behold! But why could we 




all see their horses?' 

'Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are real robes 
that they wear to give shape to their nothingness when they have dealings 
with the living.' 

'Then why do these black horses endure such riders? All other animals 
are terrified when they draw near, even the elf-horse of Glorfindel. The 
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.’ 

'Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord 
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are ores and 
trolls, there are wargs and werewolves; and there have been and still are 
many Men, warriors and kings, that walk alive under the Sun, and yet are 
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.’ 

'What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?’ 

'Yes, at present, until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear the 
Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but never again will they listen to 
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live still some of his chief 
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They 
do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the Blessed Realm 
live at once in both worlds, and against both the Seen and the Unseen they 
have great power.' 

'I thought that I saw a white figure that shone and did not grow dim 
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?' 

'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the 
mighty of the Firstborn. Lie is an Elf-lord of a house of princes. Indeed 
there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while: 
and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind 
in the Shire. But all such places will soon become islands under siege, if 
things go on as they are going. The Dark Lord is putting forth all his 
strength. 

'Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin, while 
his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, 'we must keep up our 
courage. You will soon be well, if I do not talk you to death. You are in 
Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.' 

'I haven't any courage to keep up,' said Frodo, 'but I am not worried 
at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me the end of the 
affair at the Ford, as I keep on asking, and I shall be content for the 
present. After that I shall have another sleep, I think; but I shan't be 




able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.' 

Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo. 

The colour had come back to his face, and his eyes were clear, and fully 
awake and aware. He was smiling, and there seemed to be little wrong with 
him. But to the wizard's eye there was a faint change just a hint as it were 
of transparency, about him, and especially about the left hand that lay 
outside upon the coverlet. 

'Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. 'He is not half 
through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond can 
foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass filled with a 
clear light for eyes to see that can.' 

'You look splendid,' he said aloud. 'I will risk a brief tale without 
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again. 
This is what happened, as far as I can gather. The Riders made straight for 
you, as soon as you fled. They did not need the guidance of their horses any 
longer: you had become visible to them, being already on the threshold of 
their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off the 
road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save 
you, if the white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, 
and too many to oppose. On foot even Glorfindel and Aragorn together could 
not with stand all the Nine at once. 

'When the Ring wraiths swept by, your friends ran up behind. Close to 
the Ford there is a small hollow beside the road masked by a few stunted 
trees. There they hastily kindled fire; for Glorfindel knew that a flood 
would come down, if the Riders tried to cross, and then he would have to 
deal with any that were left on his side of the river. The moment the flood 
appeared, he rushed out, followed by Aragorn and the. others with flaming 
brands. Caught between fire and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in 
his wrath, they were dismayed, and their horses were stricken with madness. 
Three were carried away by the first assault of the flood; the others were 
now hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.' 

'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo. 

'No,' said Gandalf. 'Their horses must have perished, and without them 
they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths themselves cannot be so easily 
destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your 
friends crossed after the flood had passed; and they found you lying on your 
face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword under you. The horse was 




standing guard beside you. You were pale and cold, and they feared that you 
were dead, or worse. Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards 
Ri vendell. ' 

'Who made the flood?' asked Frodo. 

'Elrond commanded it,' answered Gandalf. 'The river of this valley is 
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the 
Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the 
flood was released. If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you 
may not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of great white 
horses with shining white riders; and there were many rolling and grinding 
boulders. For a moment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a 
wrath, and the flood would get out of hand and wash you all away. There is 
great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty 
Mountains.' 

'Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: 'the tremendous 
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and all. But 
now we are safe!' 

Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. 'Yes, you 
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to 
celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there in 
places of honour.' 

'Splendid!' said Frodo. 'It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel 
and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much trouble 
and show me so much kindness.’ 

'Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said Gandalf, smiling. 

'I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you 
are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.’ 

'Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. 'I wonder where he is. I wish he was 
here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh, The cow 
jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!’ With that he fell fast 
asleep. 

Frodo was now safe in the Fast Homely House east of the Sea. That house 
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, 'a perfect house, whether you like food 
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or 
a pleasant mixture of them all'. Merely to be there was a cure for 
weariness, fear, and sadness. 

As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he found that he no 




longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and 
probably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He got out of bed and 
discovered that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it ever had 
been. He found laid ready clean garments of green cloth that fitted him 
excellently. Looking in a mirror he was startled to see a much thinner 
reflection of himself than he remembered: it looked remarkably like the 
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire; 
but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully. 

'Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a 
looking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!' 

He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune. 

At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came in. He ran 
to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it gently 
and then he blushed and turned hastily away. 

'Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo. 

'It's warm!' said Sam. 'Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt so 
cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried, turning 
round again with shining eyes and dancing on the floor. ’It's fine to see 
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were 
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.' 

'I am ready,' said Frodo. 'Let's go and look for the rest of the 
party!' 

'I can take you to them, sir,' said Sam. 'It's a big house this, and 
very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what you'll 
find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there! Some like 
kings, terrible and splendid; and some as merry as children. And the music 
and the singing-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening 
since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.' 

'I know what you have been doing, Sam,' said Frodo, taking his arm. 
'But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart's content. Come 
on, guide me round the corners!' 

Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out into a 
high garden above the steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting 
in a porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the 
valley below, but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far 
above. The air was warm. The sound of running and falling water was loud, 
and the evening was filled with a faint scent of trees and flowers, as if 




summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens. 

'Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing up. 'Here is our noble cousin! Make 
way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!' 

'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch. 'Evil 
things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should not name 
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of 
Mordor, whose power is again stretching out over the world! We are sitting 
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’ 

'Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ said Pippin. 

'He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible, somehow, to 
feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the 
right song for the occasion.’ 

'I feel like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. 'Though at the moment I 
feel more like eating and drinking!’ 

'That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. 'You have shown your usual 
cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.’ 

'More than meal! A feast!’ said Merry. 'As soon as Gandalf reported 
that you were recovered, the preparations began.’ He had hardly finished 
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells. 

The hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves for the most 
part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was his 
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and 
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf. 

Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of 
whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left, 
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were 
revealed 

as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other 
two; but his long white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broad 
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his aged 
face under great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could 
leap suddenly into fire. 

Glorfindel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his 
face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright and 
keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and in his hand was 
strength. 

The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was 




written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark 
as the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a circlet of silver; his 
eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of 
stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale 
as a tried warrior in the fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of 
Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men. 

In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon the wall, 
there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look upon, 
and so like was she in form of womanhood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that 
she was one of his close kindred. Young she was and yet not so. The braids 
of her dark hair were touched by no frost, her white arms and clear face 
were flawless and smooth, and the light of stars was in her bright eyes, 
grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge 
were in her glance, as of one who has known many things that the years 
bring. Above her brow her head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted 
with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament 
save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver. 

So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen; Arwen, 
daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that the likeness of L®thien had 
come on earth again; and she was called Undumiel, for she was the Evenstar 
of her people. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin, in Lurien 
beyond the mountains, and was but lately returned to Rivendell to her 
father's house. But her brothers, Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon 
errantry: for they rode often far afield with the Rangers of the North, 
forgetting never their mother's torment in the dens of the ores. 

Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor 
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find that he 
had a seat at Elrond' s table among all these folk so high and fair. Though 
he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several cushions, he felt very 
small, and rather out of place; but that feeling quickly passed. The feast 
was merry and the food all that his hunger could desire. It was some time 
before he looked about him again or even turned to his neighbours. 

He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to wait 
on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a guest of 
honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper 
end of one of the side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign of 
Strider. 




Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly 
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was white, nearly as white as the 
snow-white cloth of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck 
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him. 

'Welcome and well met!' said the dwarf, turning towards him. Then he 
actually rose from his seat and bowed. 'Gluin at your service,' he said, and 
bowed still lower. 

'Frodo Baggins at your service and your family's,' said Frodo 
correctly, rising in surprise and scattering his cushions. 'Am I right in 
guessing that you are the Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the great 
Thorin Oaken shield?' 

'Quite right,' answered the dwarf, gathering up the cushions and 
courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. 'And I do not ask, for I 
have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our 
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.' 

'Thank you very much,’ said Frodo. 

'You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,' said Gluin. 'I 
wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey. Nothing like 
it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire 
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?' 

'I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,' said Frodo 
politely. 

He guessed that even in Elrond's house the matter of the Ring was not 
one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his troubles for a 
time. 'But I am equally curious,' he added, 'to learn what brings so 
important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.' 

Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I think we will not speak 
yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us all ere long, I believe, 
and then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that may be 
told.' 

Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but Frodo 
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring, 
seemed small and far-away and unimportant, while Gluin had much to tell of 
events in the northern regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn 
the Old, son of Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men, and to their 
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither ore nor wolf dared to go. 

'Indeed,' said Gluin, 'if it were not for the Beornings, the passage 




from Dale to Rivendell would long ago have become impossible. They are 
valiant men and keep open the High Pass and the Ford of Carrock. But their 
tolls are high,' he added with a shake of his head; 'and like Beorn of old 
they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty, and that is much 
in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to us as the Men of 
Dale. They are good folk, the Bardings. The grandson of Bard the Bowman 
rules them, Brand son of Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his 
realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.' 

'And what of your own people?' asked Frodo. 

'There is much to tell, good and bad,' said Gluin; 'yet it is mostly 
good: we have so far been fortunate, though we do not escape the shadow of 
these times. If you really wish to hear of us, I will tell you tidings 
gladly. But stop me when you are weary! Dwarves' tongues run on when 
speaking of their handiwork, they say.' 

And with that Gluin embarked on a long account of the doings of the 
Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have found so polite a listener; for 
Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject, 
though actually he soon got rather lost among the strange names of people 
and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to 
hear that Dbin was still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having 
passed his two hundred and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. 

Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies seven were 
still with him: Dwalin, Gluin, Dori, Nori, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur 
was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at 
table, and it took six young dwarves to lift him. 

'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?' asked Frodo. 

A shadow passed over Gluin's face. 'We do not know,' he answered. 'It 
is largely on account of Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those 
that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!' 

Gluin began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodo 
about their great labours in Dale and under the Mountain. 'We have done 
well,' he said. 'But in metalwork we cannot rival our fathers, many of 
whose, secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot 
again make mail or blade to match those that were made before the dragon 
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should 
see the waterways of Dale, Frodo, and the fountains, and the pools! You 
should see the stone-paved roads of many colours! And the halls and 




cavernous streets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the 
terraces and towers upon the Mountain’s sides! Then you would see that we 
have not been idle.’ 

'I will come and see them, if ever I can,' said Frodo. 'How surprised 
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!' 

Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you 
not?' he asked. 

'Yes,' answered Frodo. 1 would rather see him than all the towers and 
palaces in the world.' 

At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went down 
the hall, and the company followed them in due order. The doors were thrown 
open, and they went across a wide passage and through other doors, and came 
into a further hall. In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in 
a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side. 

Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. 'This is the Hall of Fire' 
said the wizard. 'Here you will hear many songs and tales-if you can keep 
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people 
come here who wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all 
the year round, but there is little other light.' 

As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him, elvish 
minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the hall filled, and Frodo 
looked with delight upon the many fair faces that were gathered together; 
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in their hair. Suddenly 
he noticed, not far from the further end of the fire, a small dark figure 
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on the 
ground was a drinking-cup and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was 
ill 

(if people were ever ill in Ri vendell), and had been unable to come to the 
feast. His head seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his dark 
cloak was drawn over his face. 

Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent figure. 'Awake little 
master, he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him. 
'Now at last the hour has come that you have wished for, Frodo,' he said. 
'Here is a friend that you have long missed.' 

The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face. 

'Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward. 

'Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. 'So you have got here at last. I 




hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in your 
honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?' 

'Why weren't you there?' cried Frodo. 'And why haven't I been allowed 
to see you before?' 

'Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by 
your side with Sam each day. But as for the feast' I don't go in for such 
things much now. And I had something else to do.' 

'What were you doing?’ 

'Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and this is 
the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ he said, cocking an 
eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness 
that Frodo could see. 'Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want 
to know, you have all come out from your feast too soon, and you have 
disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck over a line or 
two, and was thinking about them; but now I don't suppose I shall ever get 
them right. There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be 
driven clean out of my head. I shall have to get my friend the D®nadan to 
help me. Where is he?' 

Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched his heart. 
'Leave one! 'he said. 'We'll need it. But you can't come like this without 
your gear or food or anything.' 

'Just hold on a moment, and I'll get my stuff!' cried Sam eagerly. 

'It's all ready. I thought we should be off today.' He rushed to the camping 
place, fished out his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it when he 
emptied the boat of his companions' goods grabbed a spare blanket, and some 
extra packages of food, and ran back. 

'So all my plan is spoilt! ’ said Frodo. 'It is no good trying to 
escape you. But I’m glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is 
plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find 
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them 
again.' 

'Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,' said Sam. 

So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo 
paddled away from the shore, and the River bore them swiftly away, down the 
western arm, and past the frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of the 
great falls drew nearer. Even with such help as Sam could give, it was hard 
work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive 
the boat eastward towards the far shore. 

At length they came to land again upon the southern slopes of Amon 
Lhaw. There they found a shelving shore, and they drew the boat out, high 
above the water, and hid it as well as they could behind a great boulder. 

Then shouldering their burdens, they set off, seeking a path that would 
bring them over the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and down into the Land of 
Shadow. 